from orchestrator import begin

# 4.8 Upgrade Guide

In this document we describe important changes to be aware of when upgrading from `orchestrator-core` v4.7 to v4.8.

## About 4.8

This release introduces a deprecation and a breaking change to a beta feature:

1. Workflow now supports [run predicates], which allow you to define conditions under which a workflow is allowed to run.
2. Scheduled task `validate-products` has been removed from the scheduler as a decorated task. You can add it by running a CLI command to load the default scheduled tasks or by using the API to create a schedule with the same configuration.

### 1. Workflow run predicates

In v4.8.0 we have added support for run predicates, which are functions that can be defined on a workflow to determine whether a workflow run should be allowed to start or not.
This is a very powerful feature that can be used for a variety of use cases, such as the validation of preconditions before starting a workflow, or to implement a maintenance mode for certain workflows.
For more information see the section about workflow [run predicates] reference documentation.

### 2. Adding validate-products back to the schedule and removing other default schedules

**Short answer**

If you want to keep using the default schedules, run `python main.py scheduler load-initial-schedule` from the CLI where you normally run your scheduler.

Otherwise, no action is required.

**Long answer**

In v4.7.0 the only remaining schedule was `validate-products`. (this will be removed in [#1250])
However, since we have added workflow run predicates in v4.8.0, we could easily migrate this schedule to use the new API and add a run predicate to it, which is what we have done. (as from this PR: [#1399])


If you want to recreate this schedule by using the API, we have provided a command to do so:

```
python main.py scheduler load-initial-schedule
```

For more information: [Scheduler API].


[#1250]: https://github.com/workfloworchestrator/orchestrator-core/issues/1250
[#1399]: https://github.com/workfloworchestrator/orchestrator-core/pull/1399
[run predicates]: ../../reference-docs/workflows/run-predicates.md
[Scheduler API]: ../tasks.md#the-schedule-api
